so pop is going to begin this beautiful
passage by talking about the optimistic
epistemology of bacon and descar now
what was that well the optimistic
epistemology of bacon was that we could
observe the facts of reality okay
observation was the thing that allowed
us to come to certain knowledge of a
Kind this is the empiricist doctrine
okay this is what we inherit from the
enlightenment British thinkers in the
form of bacon Descartes the Continental
thinker who thought that clear and
distinct ideas our reason was able to
give us truth and some way Deliver us
the truth the final truth because our
rational faculties would not allow us to
ER so what does Papa say about these two
great thinkers and what did they lay the
foundations of or the beginnings of a
particular movement a revolution an
Enlightenment style of thinking let's
read what papa says a passage as I say
that I find unparalleled amongst so many
other modern philosophy offers
contemporaries of popper much less
people that came later until David Dodge
popper wrote quote thus the optimistic
epistemology of bacon and Descartes
cannot be true yet Perhaps the strangest
thing in this story is that this Force
epistemology was the major inspiration
of an intellectual and moral Revolution
without parallel in history it
encouraged men to think for themselves
it gave them hope that through knowledge
they might free themselves and others
from servitude and misery it made modern
science possible it became the basis of
the fight against censorship and the
suppression of free thoughts it became
the basis of the non-conformist
conscience of individualism and of a new
sense of man's Dignity of a demand for
Universal education and of a new dream
of a free Society it made men feel
responsible for themselves and for
others and eager to improve not only
their own condition but also of their
fellow men then it is a case of a bad
idea inspiring many good ones end quote
again as I say speaking of unparalleled
that's unparalleled that's beautiful
this idea that you don't need a
certainly true perfect Foundation of an
idea in order to spawn all of these
other movements for progress progress
can happen because you can take what is
true within an idea although you might
not be able to articulate it and use it
in order to solve problems elsewhere so
these ideas of bacon and Descartes yes
we get from bacon the idea that
observation that our senses provide us
with something it's important to use our
senses to use observation in things like
science to decide between the theories
we guess yes so bacon was the first one
to really emphasize this notion of
empiricism and as popises he's an
empiricist of a kind just not that kind
he just thinks that observations are
important they're also Theory later and
Descartes the great rationalists the
Continental rationalist who said reason
is the way in which we can get to the
truth well not quite but reason is
absolutely indispensable to the project
of creating knowledge and together you
take what is good about these to blend
them together and you get this papyrian
View and also all of this other great
stuff that he's just mentioned there the
basis of the fight against censorship
the sense of individualism and man's
dignity the dream of a free Society so
that comes from bacon and Descartes who
ultimately their ideas ultimately were
false but they contained within them the
seeds for progress and for the rest of
the Enlightenment that followed and
further for the concept of objective
knowledge that Papa has gifted to us and
which David Deutsch has now taken even
further
[Music]